>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MAY 23: NOT
GUILTY-- THE DRAMATIC VERDICT
IN THE CASE AGAINST THE
CLEVELAND OFFICER ACCUSED OF
KILLING TWO UNARMED SUSPECTS;
AFTER A LATE-NIGHT VOTE, THE
SENATE FAILS TO EXTEND A
CONTROVERSIAL DOMESTIC
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM;
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE POTENTIAL DANGERS OF
TRANSPORTING OIL ACROSS THE
COUNTRY BY RAIL.
>> IF WE'RE SENDING 10 OR 20 OR
30 TIMES AS MUCH OIL DOWN THE
TRACK, THAT OBVIOUSLY INCREASES
THE CHANCES OF AN ACCIDENT
OCCURRING.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PROTESTERS MARCHED IN CLEVELAND
TODAY AFTER POLICE OFFICER
MICHAEL BRELO WAS FOUND NOT
GUILTY ON ALL COUNTS IN THE
SHOOTING DEATHS OF TWO BLACK,
UNARMED SUSPECTS.
BRELO WAS AMONG THE 13 OFFICERS
WHO FIRED 137 BULLETS AT A CAR
DURING AND AFTER A HIGH-SPEED
CHASE IN NOVEMBER OF 2012.
ONCE THE SUSPECTS STOPPED, BRELO
JUMPED ONTO THE HOOD AND FIRED
15 ROUNDS INTO THE WINDSHIELD.
43-YEAR-OLD DRIVER TIMOTHY
RUSSELL AND 30-YEAR-OLD
PASSENGER MALISSA WILLIAMS WERE
KILLED.
THIS MORNING, JUDGE JOHN
O'DONNELL SPENT NEARLY AN HOUR
EXPLAINING THAT OFFICER BRELO'S
BULLETS COULD NOT BE PROVED TO
BE THE FATAL SHOTS BEYOND A
DOUBT, AND THAT THE DECISION TO
FIRE HIS WEAPON WAS
CONSTITUTIONALLY REASONABLE.
>> I FIND BY A PREPONDERANCE
OF THE EVIDENCE THAT BRELO'S
DECISION TO USE DEADLY FORCE
AGAINST RUSSELL AND WILLIAMS WAS
BASED ON PROBABLE CAUSE TO
BELIEVE THAT THEY
THREATENED IMMINENT, SERIOUS
BODILY HARM TO HIM AND THE OTHER
OFFICERS, NOT TO MENTION THE
PUBLIC.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
VICTIMS' FAMILY MEMBERS HAD THIS
RESPONSE:
>> BUT HOW CAN YOU GET ON TOP OF
THIS CAR AND NOT BE CHARGED?
AND NOT BE CHARGED!
YOU KNOW WHAT YOU DID!
>> I WILL NEVER TRUST THE
CLEVELAND POLICE, THE DEPUTY
SHERIFF, ANY POLICE, PERIOD,
NEVER AGAIN.
I WILL NEVER CALL THEM TO MY
HOUSE FOR ANYTHING.
>> Sreenivasan: BRELO'S DEFENSE
ATTORNEY HELD THE VICTIMS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EVENTS AND
HAD STRONG WORDS FOR THE
PROSECUTION.
>> THE PROSECUTION IN THIS CASE
SPARED NO EXPENSE AND WAS IN
FACT RUTHLESS.
IT WAS CLASSICALLY A CASE OF
DAVID VERSUS GOLIATH.
>> Sreenivasan: CLEVELAND'S
POLICE CHIEF TOLD REPORTERS THAT
OFFICER BRELO REMAINS ON UNPAID
SUSPENSION WHILE THE DEPARTMENT
EXPLORES ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES.
FOR MORE ON THE VERDICT, I'M
JOINED FROM CLEVELAND BY "PLAIN
DEALER" REPORTER MARK NAYMIK.
SO, OF THE PEOPLE YOU'VE TALKED
TO AND THE PLACES YOU VISITED
TODAY THAT KNEW ABOUT THE
VERDICT, WHAT WAS THEIR
REACTION?
>> YOU KNOW, SOME IS, WELL, WE
EXPECTED IT.
NOW, THEY MAY EXPECT IT BECAUSE,
YOU KNOW, SOME IDENTIFIED THEIR
DISTRUST FOR THE JUSTICE SYSTEM;
OTHERS, YOU KNOW, THOUGHT, WELL,
OKAY, THAT'S WHAT THE EVIDENCE
SHOWED, BUT NO ONE WAS
SURPRISED.
NO ONE VOICED THAT TO ME.
THEY ARE DISAPPOINTED, THEY ARE
FRUSTRATED, THEY USE IT AS A
POINT TO TALK ABOUT LARGER
ISSUES IN THE CITY-- OBVIOUSLY
ECONOMIC ISSUES, CRIME-- AND
PEOPLE WANT MORE ATTENTION PAID
TO THEM AND THEIR ISSUES, BUT
NOBODY SAID TO ME, "WOW, I AM
SHOCKED."
>> Sreenivasan: THE MAYOR,
FRANK JACKSON, CALLED THIS A
"DEFINING MOMENT FOR THE CITY."
THIS IS A CITY STILL ON EDGE
FROM TAMIR RICE, AND THERE WERE
SCHEDULED PROTESTS FOR THAT,
RIGHT?
>> YES.
IN FACT, THAT IS JUST ONE OF
SEVERAL MORE MAJOR DECISIONS
THAT I THINK WILL TEST BOTH THE
POLICE RESPONSE, THE ORGANIZED
DEMONSTRATION RESPONSE, AND KIND
OF THE RESIDENTS' PATIENCE.
TAMIR RICE, OVER THE LAST FEW
WEEKS, THAT ISSUE-- AND TODAY IS
THE SIX-MONTH ANNIVERSARY SINCE
HE WAS SHOT-- THAT'S WHY THERE
WERE SCHEDULED PROTESTS.
THAT REALLY SEEMS TO CONNECT A
LITTLE BIT MORE THAN THIS BRELO
VERDICT, WHICH NOW DATES BACK TO
2012.
AGAIN, TWO PEOPLE DIED, MANY
PEOPLE ANGRY ABOUT IT BUT TAMIR
RICE, THE IDEA OF A 12-YEAR-OLD
BOY, MANY KNEW HIM, HE WAS FROM
A NEIGHBORHOOD ON THE WEST SIDE,
THAT ONE REALLY HAS THE
EMOTIONAL PUNCH THAT I THINK
WITH THIS AND THE POLICE CHASE
AND SHOOTING OF TIMOTHY
RUSSELL AND MELISSA WILLIAMS
IS THE ONE THAT COULD SPARK A
STRONGER REACTION, BUT RIGHT NOW
IT IS VERY CALM.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CHIEF OF
POLICE SAID THEY ARE ALREADY
PLANNING TO CHANGE THEIR POLICY
ON HIGH-SPEED PURSUITS.
>> AND THEY HAVE SHOWN THAT IN
THE LAST TWO WEEKS.
WE HAD A HIGH-SPEED CHASE THAT
WAS CALLED OFF, AND THERE WAS
SOME CRITICISM FROM THE POLICE
UNION ABOUT THAT, SAYING THAT,
"YOU KNOW, WE LET THESE PEOPLE
GET AWAY.
THIS WAS MANAGED WELL, NOBODY
WAS AT RISK."
THEY DID GET LICENSE PLATE
INFORMATION AND THE NEXT DAY
THEY ARRESTED THAT SUSPECT.
THE CITY HAS BEEN MAKING THAT
MESSAGE A LOT, THAT THEY HAVE
ALREADY CHANGED POLICY IN
REACTION TO THAT 2012 POLICE
CHASE THAT ENDED IN THE
SHOOTING.
THEY ARE TALKING ABOUT THE
CHANGES THEY ARE MAKING WITH
SO-CALLED COMMUNITY POLICING AND
TRYING TO CONNECT WITH THE
RESIDENTS.
VERY IMPORTANT MESSAGE TO BE
SENT RIGHT NOW AT A TIME WHEN
PEOPLE AGAIN ARE ON EDGE AND
POTENTIALLY READY TO REACT.
ONE OF SEVERAL...
WE HAVE A DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
CONSENT DECREE THAT IS BEING
NEGOTIATED RIGHT NOW THAT SHOULD
BE DONE IN THE NEXT MONTH OR
SO.
THAT WILL HAVE A REACTION.
THE TAMIR RICE INVESTIGATION IS
STILL NOT COMPLETED.
THAT WILL HAVE A REACTION.
AND WHETHER THEY CHARGE, ANOTHER
POTENTIAL FLASH POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MARK NAYMIK, REPORTER FROM THE
CLEVELAND "PLAIN DEALER," THANK
YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: DESPITE INTENSE
DEBATE AND A LATE-NIGHT VOTE,
THE SENATE REJECTED LEGISLATION
THAT WOULD HAVE EXTENDED THE
GOVERNMENT'S DOMESTIC
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM.
THE KEY PROVISION OF THE PATRIOT
ACT IS SET TO EXPIRE AT MIDNIGHT
ON MAY 31.
EARLIER, THE HOUSE PASSED A
COMPROMISE THAT WOULD STOP THE
N.S.A. FROM COLLECTING ALL PHONE
DATA, BUT ALLOW THE GOVERNMENT
TO REQUEST SPECIFIC RECORDS FROM
PHONE COMPANIES, WITH A WARRANT.
BUT TOP SENATE REPUBLICANS ARE
DIVIDED AND ENDED UP REJECTING
THE HOUSE VERSION EARLY THIS
MORNING.
>> THIS IS A DEBATE ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT A WARRANT WITH A
SINGLE NAME OF A SINGLE COMPANY
CAN BE USED TO COLLECT ALL THE
RECORDS, ALL OF THE PHONE
RECORDS OF ALL OF THE PEOPLE IN
OUR COUNTRY WITH A SINGLE
WARRANT.
OUR FOREFATHERS WOULD BE AGHAST.
>> THIS IS A HIGH THREAT PERIOD
AND WE KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON
OVERSEAS.
WE KNOW WHAT'S BEEN TRIED HERE
AT HOME.
MY COLLEAGUES, DO WE REALLY WANT
THIS LAW TO EXPIRE?
WE'VE GOT A WEEK TO DISCUSS IT,
WE'LL HAVE ONE DAY TO DO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE
RECESSED FOR THE MEMORIAL
DAY HOLIDAY, BUT SENATE LEADER
MITCH MCCONNELL IS CALLING
MEMBERS BACK EARLY ON SUNDAY,
THE 31st, JUST EIGHT HOURS
BEFORE THE SURVEILLANCE
PROGRAM EXPIRES AT MIDNIGHT.
THE HOUSE IS NOT SCHEDULED TO
RETURN TO SESSION UNTIL AFTER
THE DEADLINE.
IN CALIFORNIA, A DOLPHIN AND
THREE PELICANS HAVE REPORTEDLY
BEEN FOUND DEAD NEAR THAT TEN-
SQUARE-MILE OIL SPILL OFF THE
COAST OF SANTA BARBARA.
VETERINARIANS ARE STILL TRYING
TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE OIL
CAUSED THE ANIMALS' DEATHS.
CLEAN UP CREWS HAVE BEEN TRYING
TO CONTAIN THE SPILL SINCE
TUESDAY, WHEN A PRIVATELY-OWNED
PIPELINE RUPTURED, SENDING
105,000 GALLONS OF CRUDE INTO
THE OCEAN.
WORKERS DESCRIBE THE OIL SLICK
AS "THINNER THAN A COAT OF
PAINT" AND SAY ROUGH SEAS ARE
FURTHER COMPLICATING THE
CLEANUP.
U.S. SAFETY OFFICIALS ORDERED
THE PLAINS ALL AMERICAN PIPELINE
COMPANY TO SUSPEND OPERATIONS
WHILE THEY INVESTIGATE THE
CAUSE.
GENERAL MOTORS IS REPORTEDLY
FACING A RECORD-BREAKING FEDERAL
PENALTY OVER THE WAY IT HANDLED
AN IGNITION DEFECT.
THAT DEFECT HAS BEEN TIED TO AT
LEAST 104 DEATHS.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS
THAT THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HAS
IDENTIFIED CRIMINAL WRONGDOING
IN GENERAL MOTORS' FAILURE TO
DISCLOSE THE DEFECT.
G.M. IS EXPECTED TO HAVE TO PAY
AT LEAST $1 BILLION TO SETTLE
THE MATTER.
HOWEVER, OFFICIALS SAY G.M. IS
COOPERATING WITH THE
INVESTIGATION, WHICH COULD
REDUCE THE PENALTY.
THE FINAL SETTLEMENT COULD BE
REACHED AS EARLY AS THIS SUMMER.
IN IRAQ, ABOUT 3,000 PRO-
GOVERNMENT TROOPS ARE STRUGGLING
TO RETAKE THE CITY OF RAMADI
AFTER ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS
OVERRAN IT LAST WEEKEND.
THE CAPITAL OF ANBAR PROVINCE IS
ONLY 65 MILES WEST OF BAGHDAD,
AND THE ISIS VICTORY THERE IS
SEEN AS A MAJOR EMBARRASSMENT
AND STRATEGIC LOSS FOR IRAQ'S
LEADERS.
SO FAR, AT LEAST 500 PEOPLE HAVE
DIED IN FIGHTING AND A THIRD OF
THE CITY'S POPULATION HAS
REPORTEDLY FLED.
AND IN IRELAND, A NATIONWIDE
REFERENDUM ON ALLOWING GAY
MARRIAGE HAS PASSED.
OFFICIALS SAY MORE THAN 62%
VOTED YES.
IRELAND IS NOW THE FIRST COUNTRY
IN THE WORLD TO LEGALIZE GAY
MARRIAGE BY POPULAR VOTE.
A GROUP OF FARMERS IN CALIFORNIA
ARE MAKING AN UNPRECEDENTED
OFFER TO HELP THE STATE FIGHT A
RECORD-BREAKING DROUGHT.
THEY'VE AGREED TO GIVE UP A
QUARTER OF THEIR WATER THIS
SEASON.
JOINING ME NOW IS "SACRAMENTO
BEE" REPORTER DALE KASLER WITH
MORE ON THE CRISIS.
SO, WHY STRIKE SUCH A DEAL?
WHO ARE THE PLAYERS INVOLVED?
>> WELL, IT IS A GROUP OF
FARMERS IN THE DELTA REGION,
WHICH IS AN AGRICULTURAL REGION
SOUTHWEST OF SACRAMENTO.
THEY WERE FACED WITH SEVERE
WATER CUTS; AS YOU KNOW IN THE
FOURTH YEAR OF DROUGHT THE STATE
HAS BEEN CUTTING WATER USE IN
THE CITIES AND SUBURBS AND AMONG
MANY OF THE FARMERS, AND NOW
THEY ARE GOING AFTER THE FARMERS
WITH -- WITH THE SO-CALLED
SERIAL WATER RIGHTS, WATER
RIGHTS THAT WERE THOUGHT TO BE
UNTOUCHABLE, AND THEY CAME TO
THESE FARMERS AND THEY STRUCK A
DEAL.
THE GROWERS DON'T BELIEVE THAT
THE STATE DEPARTMENT NECESSARILY
HAS THE LEGAL RIGHT TO TAKE ANY
OF THEIR WATER, BUT RATHER THAN
FIGHT IT OUT THEY AGREED TO A
COMPROMISE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT IS
THEIR INCENTIVE IN GOING THIS?
GIVING UP A QUARTER OF THEIR
LAND OR LETTING SOME OF
THOSE LANDS GO FALLOW OR A
DECREASE IN THEIR CONSUMPTION BY
A QUARTER?
>> WELL THE INCENTIVE IF THEY
DON'T CUT A DEAL THEY COULD GET
DINGED EVEN WORSE.
IT IS NOT EXACTLY SURE BUT THE
STATE IS SERIOUS ABOUT CUTTING
BACK WATER DELIVERIES, AND WHO
KNOWS HOW MUCH WATER WE COULD
END UP LOSING IF THEY DON'T MAKE
A DEAL.
THIS IS A VOLUNTARY PROGRAM; THE
INDIVIDUAL FARMERS CAN EITHER
OPT IN OR OPT OUT AND THOSE WHO
OPT OUT, WHO KNOWS HOW MUCH OF A
CUT THEY COULD BE FACING.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, IF IT IS
VOLUNTARY, HOW DOES THE STATE
ENFORCE THESE CUTS?
>> SPOT CHECKS.
THEY ARE GOING TO USE SATELLITE
IMAGERY TO SEE IF PEOPLE ARE
FALLOWING FIELDS LIKE THEY SAY
THEY WILL.
AND THE STATE ALSO BELIEVES
THERE WILL BE A CERTAIN AMOUNT
OF PEER PRESSURE THAT IF YOUR
NEIGHBOR SAID HE IS GOING TO
FALLOW HIS FIELD AND NOT DIVERT
WATER OUT OF THE RIVERS, THAT
THEY THINK THAT PEOPLE WILL GO
ALONG.
THEY BELIEVE THEY WILL GET A LOT
OF COOPERATION ON THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT WHAT IS
THE POSSIBLE IMPACT OF THIS
DEAL? YOU MENTIONED THIS IS A
GROUP OF FARMERS.
HOW MUCH WATER DOES THEIR
CONSUMPTION REPRESENT OF ALL OF
THE FARMERS IN CALIFORNIA?
>> WELL, IN THE GRAND SCHEME OF
THINGS, NOT A LOT.
THESE FARMERS IN THE DELTA
REGION REPRESENT, OH, SOMETHING
LESS THAN 10% OF ALL THE
IRRIGATED FARMLAND IN
CALIFORNIA, AND THEY ARE TALKING
ABOUT GIVING UP 25% OF THEIR
WATER.
SO, AS YOU CAN SEE, IT IS NOT AS
IF CALIFORNIA WILL SOLVE THIS
WATER PROBLEM WITH A STROKE OF
THE PEN.
NEVERTHELESS, THIS IS VERY
IMPORTANT BECAUSE IT IS A
COMPROMISE, AND WATER AND
COMPROMISE DON'T OFTEN GO
TOGETHER IN CALIFORNIA.
YOU HAVE TO UNDERSTAND, EVEN
IN A NORMAL YEAR, A WET YEAR,
THERE IS LITIGATION OVER WATER
IN CALIFORNIA.
IT IS SUCH A PROFESSIONALS
COMMODITY.
THERE IS ALWAYS A TUG-OF-WAR
GOING ON OVER WATER SUPPLIES.
THERE ARE ENTIRE LAW FIRMS IN
SACRAMENTO AND ELSEWHERE THAT
ARE SOLELY DEVOTED TO LITIGATING
WATER LAW CASES.
SO, THE FACT THAT A SIGNIFICANT
GROUP OF FARMERS HAVE STEPPED UP
AND OFFERED A COMPROMISE
SOLUTION IS A PRETTY BIG DEAL IN
AND OF ITSELF, AND THE STATE
OFFICIALS ARE HOPING THAT THIS
LEADS TO FURTHER COMPROMISE
AROUND THE STATE AS THE WATER
REGULATORS START TO GO AFTER
THESE SENIOR WATER RIGHTS
HOLDERS AROUND THE STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DALE KASLER OF THE SACRAMENTO
BEE, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
THE PHILADELPHIA AMTRAK
DERAILMENT BROUGHT NEW ATTENTION
TO SAFETY ON PASSENGER TRAINS.
IT COMES AS FEDERAL REGULATORS
ARE ALSO TAKING STEPS TO IMPROVE
FREIGHT RAIL SAFETY, ESPECIALLY
WHEN IT COMES TO TRAINS THAT
HAUL OIL.
THE OIL BOOM IN PLACES LIKE
NORTH DAKOTA HAS LED TO HUGE
BUDGET SURPLUSES AND CREATED
THOUSANDS OF JOBS.
BUT BECAUSE THERE ARE FEW
PIPELINES IN THE STATE, MUCH OF
THE OIL EXTRACTED THERE HAS TO
BE SENT ACROSS THE NATION BY
RAIL.
NOW, FEDERAL OFFICIALS ARE
PUTTING NEW RULES IN PLACE,
ORDERING COMPANIES TO STRENGTHEN
OLDER RAILCARS.
THIS UPDATED STORY ORIGINALLY
AIRED LAST MAY.
STEPHEN FEE REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT WAS JUST AFTER
2:00 P.M. ON DECEMBER 30, 2013,
WHEN THE CALLS BEGAN STREAMING
IN.
TWO TRAINS HAD COLLIDED JUST
HALF A MILE OUTSIDE CASSELTON,
NORTH DAKOTA; ONE LOADED WITH
GRAIN, THE OTHER WITH CRUDE OIL.
VOLUNTEER FIRE CHIEF TIM McLEAN
HEADED STRAIGHT TO THE SCENE.
>> THEN, I KIND OF KNEW THIS WAS
GOING TO BE A BIG ONE, THE WAY
IT WAS DESCRIBED ON THE PAGERS.
>> Reporter: COMMUNITY BANKER
BERNIE SINNER WAS MEETING WITH A
CLIENT IN HIS OFFICE.
HIS WINDOW IS JUST 50 FEET FROM
THE RAIL TRACK.
>> YOU COULD SEE PLUMES OF BLACK
SMOKE RISING PRETTY HIGH ABOVE
THE TREE LINE, ABOVE THE
BUILDINGS THAT ARE ACROSS THE
STREET FROM US.
>> Reporter: FROM THE TOWN'S
MAIN INTERSECTION, WITNESSES
COULD HEAR EXPLOSIONS AS THE
RAILCARS BLEW APART, SENDING
FIREBALLS INTO THE SKY.
ED McCONNELL WAS MAYOR AT THE
TIME.
>> THEY EVACUATED THE SOUTHWEST
CORNER OF TOWN, THE PART OF THE
TOWN THAT WAS MOST AFFECTED BY
IT.
>> Reporter: BUT ONCE THE WIND
TURNED, OFFICIALS PUT THE ENTIRE
TOWN OF 2,500 UNDER A VOLUNTARY
EVACUATION ORDER.
SOME 400,000 GALLONS OF CRUDE
LEAKED FROM 18 RUPTURED CARS.
THE FIRE BURNED FOR A FULL DAY.
>> THERE'D BE NO BATTLING THIS
FIRE EVEN IF YOU HAD AN ENDLESS
SUPPLY OF WATER.
>> Reporter: BOTH TRAINS WERE
OPERATED BY B.N.S.F. RAILWAY,
AND, FOR THE RECORD, B.N.S.F. IS
A NEWSHOUR FUNDER.
NO ONE WAS KILLED OR INJURED,
BUT THE ACCIDENT HIT CLOSE TO
HOME FOR THE STATE'S GOVERNOR,
JACK DALRYMPLE; HE GREW UP IN
CASSELTON.
>> I COULDN'T BELIEVE IT.
I WAS HAVING DINNER, AND, ALL OF
A SUDDEN, SOMEBODY SENT ME A
VIDEO ON MY PHONE.
AND I SAID, "CASSELTON?"
I SAID, "I CAN'T BELIEVE THAT."
>> Reporter: WHAT DID IT TELL
YOU ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON, ON
THE RAILS HERE IN NORTH DAKOTA?
>> WELL, IT TELLS ME AND I THINK
EVERYBODY THE SAME THING.
YOU KNOW, WHAT IF THAT HAPPENED,
YOU KNOW, IN... IN A CITY OR
EVEN IN THE MIDDLE OF A TOWN?
YOU KNOW, IT COULD BE REALLY
CATASTROPHIC.
>> Reporter: AS MAYOR McCONNELL
SAYS, HIS TOWN DODGED A BULLET.
BUT MONTHS EARLIER, A COMMUNITY
IN CANADA WASN'T NEARLY SO
LUCKY.
ON JULY 6, 2013, A SIMILAR
TRAIN, ALSO LOADED WITH CRUDE
FROM THE BAKKEN SHALE FORMATION,
DERAILED AND EXPLODED IN THE
CENTER OF LAC MEGANTIC, QUEBEC,
KILLING 47 PEOPLE AND DESTROYING
MUCH OF THE TOWN CENTER.
SEVEN YEARS AGO, U.S. RAILWAYS
CARRIED JUST 9,500 CARLOADS OF
CRUDE EACH YEAR.
BUT TODAY, AS HUGE AMOUNTS OF
OIL ARE PRODUCED IN STATES LIKE
NORTH DAKOTA FAR FROM
TRADITIONAL PIPELINE
INFRASTRUCTURE, THAT FIGURE HAS
JUMPED TO HALF A MILLION.
AND AFTER A HANDFUL OF OIL TRAIN
DERAILMENTS ALREADY IN 2015,
REGULATORS ARE TAKING NOTICE,
ENACTING A RAFT OF NEW
REGULATIONS THEY HOPE WILL
PREVENT FUTURE ACCIDENTS.
>> IT'S JUST NOT SAFE.
>> Reporter: DON MORRISON RUNS
THE DAKOTA RESOURCE COUNCIL, A
CONSORTIUM OF 700 LANDOWNERS,
RANCHERS AND BUSINESSPEOPLE IN
THE STATE.
>> THEY DIDN'T LOOK DOWN THE
ROAD TO FIGURE OUT HOW ARE WE
GOING TO GET THIS TO MARKET IN A
SAFE WAY.
>> Reporter: MOST OF THE ROUGHLY
NINE MILLION BARRELS OF OIL
PRODUCED EACH DAY IN THE U.S.
TRAVELS BY PIPELINE, BUT 70% OF
THE MILLION BARRELS COMING OUT
OF NORTH DAKOTA EACH DAY GOES BY
RAIL.
THAT'S BECAUSE MOST OF THE
COUNTRY'S REFINING CAPACITY IS
FAR FROM NORTH DAKOTA.
THAT MEANS NORTH DAKOTA CRUDE
HAS TO TRAVEL HUNDREDS OF MILES
TO BE PROCESSED INTO GASOLINE
FOR CARS OR FUEL FOR JET
ENGINES.
AND WHILE PIPELINES REQUIRE NEW
CONSTRUCTION AND REGULATORY
APPROVAL-- THE LONG-STALLED
KEYSTONE XL A CASE IN POINT--
FREIGHT RAIL ALREADY
CRISSCROSSES NORTH DAKOTA AND
THE COUNTRY.
>> HISTORICALLY, YOU WOULD HAVE
NEVER THOUGHT OIL WOULD TRAVEL
BY RAIL IN THIS DAY AND AGE.
>> Reporter: RON NESS HEADS THE
NORTH DAKOTA PETROLEUM COUNCIL.
IT'S A GROUP THAT REPRESENTS THE
STATE'S OIL INDUSTRY AND
SUPPORTS HAULING OIL BY RAIL.
HOW SAFE IS IT?
>> WELL SAFETY IS CERTAINLY THE
NUMBER ONE ASPECT THAT I THINK
ALL ASPECTS OF THE
TRANSPORTATION INDUSTRY ARE
FOCUSED ON.
AND AT 99.7% OF THE TIME, YOU
KNOW, RAIL MOVEMENTS GET TO
THEIR DESTINATIONS SAFELY.
>> Reporter: ACTUALLY, THE RAIL
INDUSTRY SAYS ITS SAFETY RECORD
IS EVEN BETTER, BUT JUST THE
TINY CHANCE OF A CATASTROPHE
MAKES POLICYMAKERS LIKE THE
GOVERNOR UNEASY, ESPECIALLY WITH
NORTH DAKOTA'S MAJOR CITIES AND
TOWNS SITUATED DIRECTLY ON THE
RAILS.
>> WHERE WE, YOU KNOW, NEVER
REMEMBERED ANY KIND OF AN
ACCIDENT LIKE THIS BEFORE, NOW
IF WE'RE SENDING TEN OR 20 OR 30
TIMES AS MUCH OIL DOWN THE
TRACK, THAT OBVIOUSLY INCREASES
THE CHANCES OF AN ACCIDENT
OCCURRING.
AND THAT BECOMES SORT OF A NEW
REALITY THAT EVERYBODY HAS TO
GET USED TO.
>> Reporter: PART OF THE CONCERN
HAS CENTERED ON THE TYPE OF
RAILCARS PREDOMINANTLY USED TO
HAUL OIL ACROSS THE NATION.
SINCE 1991, THE NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD HAS
WARNED THAT RAILCARS LIKE THESE,
D.O.T. 111s, ARE MORE PRONE TO
RUPTURE IN THE CASE OF AN
ACCIDENT.
BUT IT WASN'T UNTIL A 2009
DERAILMENT IN ILLINOIS THAT THE
RAILWAY INDUSTRY BEGAN
INSTITUTING ITS OWN, MORE ROBUST
SAFETY STANDARDS TO STRENGTHEN
CARS LIKE THESE.
AFTER MONTHS OF CONSIDERATION,
FEDERAL REGULATORS THIS MAY MADE
THE DECISION TO PHASE OUT OR
RETROFIT ALL OIL-CARRYING D.O.T.
111s BY 2018, AND NEW CARS MUST
BE BUILT TO STRICT NEW STANDARDS
TO PREVENT RUPTURE.
>> OUR DEPARTMENT'S RULE IS A
PACKAGE OF NEW, INTERDEPENDENT
REGULATIONS THAT ALL COME
TOGETHER TO IMPROVE SAFETY.
THEY APPLY TO WHAT ARE OUR RULE
DEFINES AS HIGH-HAZARD FLAMMABLE
TRAINS.
AND THEY ALSO BUILD ON THE MORE
THAN TWO DOZEN ACTIONS WE HAVE
ALREADY TAKEN TO ENHANCE THE
SAFE TRANSPORT OF CRUDE.
>> Reporter: ALL TOLD, THE NEW
REGULATIONS ARE LIKELY TO COST
THE RAIL INDUSTRY SOME $2.5
BILLION.
BUT EVEN WITH NEW, STRONGER CARS
ON THE RAILS, CRITICS ARGUE
NORTH DAKOTA CRUDE ITSELF MAY BE
MORE FLAMMABLE THAN OTHER TYPES
OF OIL, POTENTIALLY LEADING TO
MORE DANGEROUS ACCIDENTS.
AGAIN, DAKOTA RESOURCE COUNCIL'S
DON MORRISON.
>> GOING THROUGH PEOPLE, RIGHT
NEXT TO PEOPLE'S HOUSES AND
BUSINESSES.
IT'S... IT'S DANGEROUS, AND
THEY'VE GOT TO BE CAREFUL.
>> Reporter: WITH JUST OVER 60
INSPECTORS NATIONWIDE, THE DOT'S
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS REGULATOR
HAS LAUNCHED ROUTINE AND
SURPRISE INSPECTIONS TO ENSURE
OIL IS BEING PROPERLY TESTED FOR
FLAMMABILITY.
THE D.O.T. HAS PUT OIL COMPANIES
ON NOTICE.
LAST YEAR, THEY LEVIED FINES
AGAINST MARATHON AND HESS FOR
ALLEGEDLY ASSIGNING THEIR OIL TO
THE WRONG SAFETY CATEGORY.
WHAT IS IT THAT... THAT IS
DISTINCT ABOUT THIS KIND OF OIL
THAT'S COMING OUT OF THE GROUND?
>> WELL, WE DON'T THINK THE
BAKKEN CRUDE OIL IS THAT
DISTINCT FROM ANY OTHER HIGH-
QUALITY, LIGHT SWEET CRUDE OIL
ACROSS AMERICA LIKE W.T.I. OR
LOUISIANA SWEET.
>> Reporter: TO PROVE THAT
POINT, THE NORTH DAKOTA
PETROLEUM COUNCIL LAST MAY
ISSUED ITS OWN STUDY, WHICH IT
SAYS SHOWS OIL FROM THE REGION
"DOES NOT POSE A GREATER RISK TO
TRANSPORT BY RAIL THAN OTHER
TRANSPORTATION FUELS."
EARLY LAST YEAR, NORTH DAKOTA'S
REPUBLICAN PARTY CHAIRMAN
SUGGESTED OIL DEVELOPMENT MAY BE
MOVING TOO QUICKLY.
EVEN WITH THE FASTEST GROWING
ECONOMY IN THE COUNTRY, CRITICS
SAY IT'S TIME FOR A SLOWDOWN IN
THE STATE'S ENERGY DEVELOPMENT.
BUT THE GOVERNOR THINKS THAT'S
UNWISE.
>> ULTIMATELY, WE DO HAVE TO
LOOK AT THE STATISTICS OF
EVERYTHING.
YOU KNOW, WE WOULD NOT SHUT DOWN
THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY BECAUSE
THERE WAS ONE AIRPLANE CRASH,
AND WE DON'T CLOSE OUR
INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS BECAUSE
THERE'S A CAR ACCIDENT.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, MILE-
LONG OIL TRAINS RUMBLE THROUGH
TOWNS LIKE CASSELTON, AND,
DESPITE REASSURANCES, FORMER
MAYOR ED McCONNELL IS WORRIED.
>> IT'S A MECHANICAL SYSTEM, AND
ANY TIME IT'S USED MORE, THERE'S
GOING TO BE MORE FAILURES.
IT'S JUST INEVITABLE.
>> Reporter: OIL PRODUCTION IN
NORTH DAKOTA IS EXPECTED TO
CLIMB 70% BY 2020, AND MOST OF
THAT OIL WILL TRAVEL BY RAIL.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING TO THE
TOPIC OF IRAQ AND SYRIA AND ISIS
GAINS IN THE REGION, I AM JOINED
NOW FROM BAGHDAD VIA SKYPE BY
"WASHINGTON POST" REPORTER
LOVEDAY MORRIS.
SO, LET'S, IT GETS A LOT OF
PRESS BECAUSE IT IS A WORLD
HERITAGE SITE BUT THERE ARE ALSO
PEOPLE AND HUMAN BEINGS THERE.
WHAT IS LIFE LIKE NOW THAT ISIS
IS IN CONTROL?
>> THE REGIME ACTUALLY SAYS WHEN
THEY WITHDREW THEY ALLOWED THE
CIVILIANS OUT, BUT THAT IS NOT
THE CASE.
THERE ARE STILL A LOT OF
CIVILIANS TRAPPED THERE.
ISIS, AS SOON AS ISIS CAME IN
THEY MADE ANNOUNCEMENT FROM THE
LOUD SPEAKERS OF THE MOSQUE THAT
THOSE WHO COLLABORATED AND THERE
WERE BODIES POUND IN THE STREET,
PEOPLE WHO WERE SUSPECTED TO BE
OPPOSITION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ANY WORD
THAT THE RELICS IN THE U.N.
WORLD HERITAGE SITES ARE IN
IMMINENT DANGER?
HAVE THERE BEEN ANY VIDEOS OF
THEM DESTROYING ARTIFACTS?
>> NO, NOT AS OF YET, AND
PALMERA, THEY SAID ISIS AREN'T
REALLY THERE YET; THEY ARE MUCH
MORE FOCUSED ON THE WESTERN
STEP, WESTERN DEPOTS AND
GENERALLY SECURING THE TOWN AND
GETTING A MILITARY GRIP.
IF YOU LOOK AT OTHER AREAS THEY
HAVE TAKEN IN IRAQ WHERE THEY
DESTROYED ANTIQUITIES IT HAS NOT
BEEN FOR A FEW WEEKS AT LEAST
AND SOMETIMES EVEN MONTHS AFTER
THEY HAVE TAKEN AREAS THAT THEY
HAVE ACTUALLY DESTROYED THIS
CULTURAL HERITAGE.
YOU SOMETIMES NOTICE THAT MAYBE
WHEN THE VERY FAMILY, WHEN THE
STORY DIES DOWN, THE RELEASE OF
THE VIDEO WILL, OF THEM LIKE
DESTROYING A HERITAGE SITE, SO
IT IS POSSIBLE WE WON'T SEE ANY
OF THAT FOR A WHILE BUT
OBVIOUSLY THERE IS GREAT CONCERN
OF THE HERITAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: LOVEDAY MORRIS
OF THE "WASHINGTON POST" JOINING
US LIVE FROM BAGHDAD VIA SKYPE.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
MORE THAN 37 MILLION AMERICANS
EXPECTED TO TRAVEL AT LEAST 50
MILES OVER THIS HOLIDAY WEEKEND,
THE VAST MAJORITY GOING BY CAR,
ACCORDING TO A.A.A., THAT'S THE
HIGHEST NUMBER OF FOLKS
TRAVELING OVER MEMORIAL DAY IN
TEN YEARS.
EXPERTS SAY THE OVERALL DROP IN
GAS PRICES IS FUELING THE SPIKE
IN TRAFFIC, SOME DRIVERS ARE
SAVING NEARLY A DOLLAR PER
GALLON COMPARED TO LAST YEAR.
THAT IS IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.